>> Hey, Seth. Welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
>> Hey, Michael.
>> Awesome to have you here. I'm really excited to get a look into the zeitgeist of the core
devs and the people building Python for us through the Python Language Summit.
>> Yeah. Let's do it.
>> Let's do it. So we're going to talk about the 2024 Language Summit that happened in
Pittsburgh. It's like an embedded mini conference inside of PyCon, which is smart rather than
trying to travel all over. But before we get into that and all those things, I know you've
been on the show not too long ago, but for those who may have missed your introductions,
you know, who are you? What do you do for Python these days?
>> Yeah, I'm Seth Larson, and I've been working at the Python Software Foundation for a little
over a year now as the security developer in residence. And so that means that I do
a lot of stuff related to security just for the entire Python ecosystem. That's CPython,
pip, the packaging ecosystem, like outwardly facing things for PyPI, maybe not as much
the internals. I leave that for Mike Fiedler, the PyPI safety and security engineer. And
I maintain a lot of open source projects specifically in like the HTTP and internet space. So like
requests, Urlib3, TrustStore, things like that.
>> Oh, awesome. Yeah, thanks for everything you're doing there. And how's the role working
out? I know this is one of... You were the first person in this role, like officially,
right? Is that true?
>> It is true. Yeah, I was the first security oriented hire at the PSF. It's been going
really great. I mean, I feel like we've made a lot of improvements. And there's a lot of
exciting stuff that I'm working on today. And I don't know, I think one of the things
that also got highlighted, because this role exists, it just means that more people at
the PSF and in CPython core team and just in the Python ecosystem in general are talking
more about security. And like, that's just as important as the stuff that I'm doing day
to day is that it's just, there's just more awareness of what's happening in security.
>> So I have two polar opposite thoughts here. One is, I'm really surprised how few significant
issues there are in Python, CPython. The interpreter, the runtime, the standard library, all that.
It's really rare that you get a red light flashing, oh my gosh, go patch your systems
now. There's sometimes really minor things like this audit trail is not completely followed
under this condition, but that's not a, the pager goes off and you know, cause you got,
it's now a race. That's one thing. So that's awesome, right? That the other is PyPI, typo
squatting, all the stuff that makes Python extra good, the half million packages and
other shady things people do. And we're going to talk about this in the broader sense, not
PyPI, but you know, in the open source space of like, well, what if, what if somebody took
over a GitHub account for a little while or, or something? Yeah. So in that, that's not
on fire, but that's, there are battles being waged actively there, I would say. Right.
It's a contrast, right?
>> I can speak with confidence that there is malware on PyPI right now as we speak, but
like, yeah, so that's, that's the case. Right. I think it really has to do with CPython is
an incredibly mature project in like every sense of the word, like governance, security,
design, all of these things. Right. And like, there's just a huge amount of people and resources
being, being work, like working on CPython at any one moment and like contrast that to
the, you said half a million, you know, I tend to focus on the like 95% of downloads
by totality. Right. Because there's a lot of projects on PyPI that maybe don't have
the supply chain criticality of others. Right. But yeah, absolutely. A hundred percent. And
when you, I think when you hone in on that smaller window of projects it ends up being
a much better picture than
>> I think it's a hundred percent good picture. Honestly, there are legitimate bugs that people
have to deal with. Like, you know, maybe there's a Django release that says we didn't validate
the CRF token in, in this particular form. So you should update your Django. Right. And
that's, that's just a legit bug. That's not people attempting to do bad things.
>> And I mean, I can't even take really any credit for how secure and mature CPython is.
I'm such a late addition in the life of CPython and like PyPI projects. So it really is the
community. I think it is just, there's so much investment and so much love and care
happening in all these projects that it does speak volumes. But that, I mean, that doesn't
mean that we need to think that things need to be perfect or that it's necessarily a bad
thing to have a vulnerability in a, in a project because there's projects that are even more
mature than CPython that have vulnerabilities all the time. It's totally normal. I think
the important thing is just like knowing what to do when that happens. And that's where
I come in. >> Yeah. I don't want to belabor this because
that, you know, the security angle, while interesting to me and central to what you're
up to is not the topic. But I do think it's interesting that the White House recently
came out. I think it was the White House that said, we recommend Python and a couple other
languages. We basically, we, we recommend memory safe languages, which did you see that
post you must have, right? >> I certainly did. And I actually had a,
a big part of recommending that to the White House. So when the...
>> No kidding. I had no idea. >> Yeah. Yeah. So the PSF, we responded
to the request for information that CISA put out or the office of the cyber director put
out, I think a year and change ago. And in that post, we recommended CPython and Python
in general as a memory safe language and went into all the details about like, yes, it's
written in C, but like the language itself, what people will actually be programming in
is Python. And we also emphasized how Python is a bridge into memory unsafe languages.
And because of all the focus on performance lately, it's actually like sometimes in some
cases more performant to keep the code written in Python as opposed to writing it in C. And
so we emphasize a whole bunch of stuff. And so I think that that had a small percentage
of the, of the reason why that was recommended. >> Put it on the radar and positioned it correctly
maybe. >> Exactly. >> Awesome. Well, congratulations. I was just going to say that's kind of interesting,
but there's way more to it than that. >> There's a lot happening behind the scenes.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. >> Yeah, there is. All right. Shall we talk
about this language summit thing? >> Let's do it. >> Let's do it. So let's just,
I mean, I gave it sort of a vague intro. You wrote a nice blog post about it here on the
Python blog. But just give us a sense of what the language summit, what is it for? Is this
something, is it like an open space I can go to or not? >> No. So the, so it is, it
is a specific space for Python core developers to use. And so I think the whole goal
of this is to get a bunch of core developers in a room together to discuss things and to
kind of get some recommendations, some ideas flowing maybe without necessarily like having
the full formed thought, right? Because like putting something out there, like completely
radically changing the direction of Python, that's a lot to put that out just publicly
or whatever. And so this is like a place to collaborate for core developers and some special
guests because not everyone that's there is a core developer, but it is invite. So you
have to like apply to go and say why you want to go. And then, yeah. So it's not just-
>> Yeah. I think some folks who were, I can't remember if it was Sebastian Ramirez or Samuel
Collin or something around the typing thing. I remember some of those folks might've been
at one of them because they're like, wait, we can't change typing to be more performant,
but where it completely ignores the runtime stuff because we have all these frameworks.
>> Right, right, right. >> Yeah.
>> Yeah. But the language summit, it's a whole bunch of different like submitted topics. People
will talk and then there's discussion and some outcome. Maybe there's no outcome. Maybe
there's like next steps. Maybe we solve some problems within the time of the meeting. And
yeah, my job there was to actually like take down all the notes and write about it and
like publish these blog posts. Because one of the reasons why this is allowed to be like
an invite only meeting is that there is someone who is basically taking notes and blogging
about everything that gets discussed and like what happened during the discussion so that
then the community can learn about what actually happened without necessarily getting the rawness
of it, I guess. >> Yeah, there's a real careful balance you
got to strike between allowing the freedom to say whatever without public scrutiny, but
at the same time, you don't want it to be like, well, the Python cabal met. They've
decided. >> Exactly.
>> They don't like your idea or whatever. >> Exactly.
>> Yeah, it's cool. So I'll point people, obviously it's going to be in the show notes,
but I'll point people at your write-up. It's like a meta post, I guess, would you say that?
It talks about sort of -- >> Landing page.
>> Landing page, exactly. Four, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine.
And then nine topics and presentations that were covered. And then the lightning talks,
which is also almost like another submeta section. So there's a lot to explore here.
And there's nice write-ups on each of these. So where should we start? Do we want to kind
of wrap up the conversation we were just having? Because that was actually a little bit of
a topic at the Language Summit, right? >> Yeah, security was definitely a topic at
the Language Summit. This was somewhat in the recent light, like the light of XZ, when
XZ had happened, Pablo, one of the release managers for CPython 3.10 and 3.11, I believe,
brought this topic. And it was basically discussing Python's contribution and release and all
of that model in the light of XZ. So like XZ, I'll just go over really quickly.
>> Yeah, yeah. Tell people about XZ. >> Yeah, I'm sure a lot of people have heard
of it at this point, but... >> It was such a long game deal. It was crazy.
So yeah, what is... >> That's the scary part.
>> What is XZUtils and then what is the XZUtils security issue?
>> Yeah, so XZUtils is a library written in C for basically processing archives of the
XZ format, which is just a compression format, like GZIP, like any other compression format,
but flea, broadly, all of those. And so this library was maintained by a single person,
big surprise. And what is relatively little known, right, before all of this happened,
I would say, was probably just adding features, fixing bugs, every once in a while make a
release and all of that. And what ended up happening is this project was identified as
a project that had very few maintainers and also, through a series of reasons, had a linkage
to SSH. And so what ended up happening... >> Oh.
>> Yep. And so SSH was... >> If you can get into SSH and SSHD, then
bad things are going to happen. >> Yeah. So the whole end goal of this entire
operation was to get access to OpenSSH through linking, basically. And so what ended up happening
is a bunch of fake sock puppet accounts showed up after this loan maintainer indicated that
they were having a little bit of trouble maintaining the project and meeting user demands. These
sock puppet accounts show up like days before they were actually used and all kind of in
similar fashion, right? And basically are pressuring this maintainer to either make
them feel like they're not doing a good job or to try to add a new maintainer. In this
case, geotan is the pseudonym that this account used. And what ended up happening is over
a year of legitimate positive contribution from this account, this account was added
as equivalent to a release manager, right? Like someone who is approving PRs and merging
things and is capable of accessing the actual archives when releases happen. And then a
good chunk of time passes after that, and there's a couple of little changes added that
on their own are not an attack, but it was preparing for an attack where essentially
a small change was added into the release archives that was not a part of the source
tree that activated the entire attack chain. And then when this started to be pulled in
downstream into things like Fedora, early versions of Red Hat, this never went into
any stable builds, but it was all the pre-releases. This ended up getting onto people's machines
and then was eventually discovered because of a very small performance difference when
logging into SSH.
Yeah, and that was somebody who wasn't even looking. I forgot the person's name, but they
worked at Microsoft and they were just on the Azure team or something. And they just
were like, why did this slow down a little bit? That's weird. And they're like, wait
a minute, what is this doing in here? Yeah, it was on the verge. And what a long game.
One person, one account came along and was just, I'm going to hear to help you. I'm going
to try to just become your best friend contributor. And then another one is just mentally abusing
the people. Why don't you just quit? Why don't you get some more support? And then like,
well, let me reach out to some people who are helping me out recently. And it turns
out these are like two sides of the same coin.
Yep, exactly.
Yeah, shady. Okay. Luckily that got caught because there's a lot of servers in the world
that can be SSHed into and like, well, we got public private key encryption. You can't
break through that stuff as long as you don't use passwords, you're going to be fine. Unless
you're not.
I received a lovely email on the day that this happened. Report to the security response
team for Python because we of course use the XZUtils libraries because Python supports
XZ format as well. And there was a lovely few seconds where I'm like, oh, this is either
going to be a fine day for me or a really bad day. And it ended up being a fine day.
So
That's good. It's like, are we going to be canceling all our plans for next few weeks?
Yep. I'm not going to have lots of questions to answer from concerned customers, users,
but it was fine.
I find this kind of stuff is a lot like, everything's fine. You relax. Just work's going good. Life's
going good. And then something's on fire just out of the blue and you have this, you know,
it takes your breath away moment. Like, does that apply to us as well? Because if it does,
everything just changed.
Yeah. Fun times.
Yeah. I'm really glad it did. So one of the talks was Python security model after this
issue, the XZUtils backdoor. Tell us about that.
Yeah. So this entire talk was essentially just overviewing like, hey, is this possible?
Is this possible for CPython to be impacted by such an attack? And I mean, the answer
is yes, it really is. Because if you have accounts that are willing to put years of
effort into contributing good code to CPython, right? Like that, that is enough to become
a core developer likely. And if you're a core developer, it means you can merge PRs. It
means if you, I mean, if you get two core developer accounts promoted to this level
of authorization, you can merge your own PRs with review, right? Like, we're the big focus
on this talk was like, okay, how can we prevent this? And if we in the ways that we can't
prevent it, how can we be ready? And kind of like a discussing whether or not we're
ready at this point. And I think the big consensus was that if we were to discover something
like this, it had already been merged into Python or had been released in Python, that
we would be okay to be able to get it to like, get the word out. Like that sort of infrastructure
already exists. And we're not too worried about that. Like we're CNA, we can create
a CV really quickly. We can get like the announcements out really quickly. We can get releases out
really quickly. So like, in that way, the reactive sense, we're okay. In the proactive
sense, there, which is the more important one, but it's also the harder one.
We yeah, because when nation states hire people to say the next three years of your job, yeah,
it's, it's almost like, it's like a team, like a spot. Yeah. For, for multiple years,
it's like the CIA or MI six or something, you know, it can on the code side, you know,
to be honest with you, it doesn't even need to necessarily be like nation state level
stuff for this to happen because vulnerabilities in popular pieces of software are very, very
lucrative. You can sell them and people make a lot of money on selling vulnerabilities
to projects, but so why not grow your own, right? Yeah. Go ahead.
One of the things I think is great is there's a really long release cycle, right? And like
a stage rollout. So I don't know how many people jump in and install alpha one of some
Python, but it's, it's pretty limited and it's not going to make it. No, no, of course.
I know I see you raising your hand. However, I don't see that shipping on, you know, Ubuntu's
update channel or, or doc, Docker's a whole different deal. Like let's not even go there,
but on the main Docker images, you know? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, this, the slow rollout is, is
definitely a big part of it, right? Like a lot of people get their Python, not direct
from the source. They get it from a, like a distribution or they get it from, you know,
if they, you know, like Amazon Linux with Python or whatever, right? Like it's a distribution
of Python brew install or brew install Python. Yeah. So a lot of people are not living on
the edge. And I think that that helps in a way. Obviously people that are living on the
edge, maybe they're the more valuable targets, but I mean, I'm not going to be the one to,
to encourage that. Yeah. I don't think that, I think the biggest defenses against
this, and this was what was discussed there was trying to push things to be in the open
and actually in a way open source is uniquely able to respond. Right, right, right, right.
And so I think that's something that we're really excited against for these sorts of
attacks, because if this were to happen in windows, for example, like would we have had
the almost immediate, like being able to debug what the actual attack was, how long this
had been going on, what patches were bad, right? Like that, that sort of visibility
into the source code is something that was really important in being able to actually
respond. And so like having test files and binary files, not checked into source code
and instead generated. So one of the parts of this attack that allowed it to go hidden
for so long and be checked into source code was that all, almost all of the attack code
was hidden extremely well in a binary file, which made it so that code reviewers...
Some of the test binary elements, cause if you've got a compression file utility, you
got to have compressed files for your unit test, right?
Exactly. So it was basically these files were checked in and there's just huge binary blobs
that you can't actually get your eyeballs on to review. We talk about like lots of eyeballs
make for shallow bugs. Well, if the eyeballs can't see the bugs, then you're not going
to find them. And so we talked about like removing binary files from the source code
or making sure that all the binary files that are generated have like a script that allows
them to be generated at any time and things like that.
Is it one of the changes recently, I can't remember if this was on PyPI or if this is
a GitHub thing, but allowing GitHub to be the thing that publishes directly, builds
the wheels and uploads them to PyPI rather than somebody downloading the code, building
them and uploading it, which obviously that's a opaque step there.
Yeah. So other like other things that tie more strongly, these, whatever release artifacts
are actually ending up on people's machines to the source code. So that's, I mean, I would
call that build provenance. There's a whole bunch of different frameworks that that works
under, but yeah, build provenance, being able to tie in an artifact that's installed in
your system back to the actual source code so that when you are evaluating that, that
artifact on whether you want to install that on your system or deciding whether to upgrade
or whatever, you can look at the source code instead of writing up this like compiled binary.
That's something that I really want to focus on for like PyPI in the future, but yeah,
we're not there yet.
Awesome. Yeah. When you, cause when you look at a project, you say, well, let me, let's
see what the release is on GitHub. If you know that literally that was the thing that
compiled or got built and then that's what's on PyPI, that's a different forensic analysis
than exactly. Well, somebody's machine, what it ends up nice, like being nice is that it,
and this is the tough part is that I feel like a lot of people's behavior, which is
to go on GitHub and look at the diff between like tags. That's what a lot of people do,
but that's not actually what you should do. You should be looking at the diff between
the artifacts. That's the thing that's actually installed in your machine, but that's way
harder to do than looking at the diff tags. So adding build.
We just crowdsource it. We're all crowdsourcing it. Like wait for somebody to scream.
I know we are.
All right. Just related to this while we're still on this topic, you know you talked about
the somewhere, there we go. There's also big news around CVEs, which are official vulnerability
numbering. So they're referenced through all those cybersecurity talk and stuff. You can
describe it better. But so big news is that the PSF now, and you alluded to this, is now
an official numbering authority. So rather than saying there's a problem with Python,
who is going to sort of officially call this out and write it up and so on, like you guys
can do that directly now, right?
Yeah. So like CVEs are basically, it's a set of identifiers and records that show, it's
like a bunch of metadata about vulnerabilities in software is what it is. And it's only one
system. There are a bunch of other like vulnerability databases, but CVE seems to be the one that
everyone uses or references. And so what being a CVE numbering authority gives us is it makes
it so that someone at the PSF can like operate the CVE UI and workflow and all of that to
say like, oh, we want to create a new CVE ID on behalf of the Python team or on behalf
of the pip team. And what that ends up meaning is that because we are part of the process,
instead of having to go to some other entity, so like Mitre or Red Hat or, you know, Microsoft,
there's a whole bunch of CNAs. There's a bunch, there's over a hundred now, I think. Instead
of going to someone else that, you know, isn't as well versed in Python or, you know, our
release schedule or any of those things, right? We get to inject the knowledge that we have
about Python into all of these records, into all these advisories. And it makes it so that
we don't actually have to talk to someone else to be able to handle a vulnerability
end to end, right? So like before you would potentially have a reporter going to talk
to someone else and getting a CVE ID, and then they would come talk to us. And by that
point, like it was, it's hard to like make a determination and there's a whole bunch
of things have already happened. And maybe there's messes that need to get cleaned up
to make sure that it's not confusing. So by owning the entire process, we're able to make
sure that things are as little confusing as possible, like what actually needs to be done
for users when we publish these things.
Yeah, that's, that's great. I want to move off the security angle here, because I know
there's so much more to talk about. However, I can't help it. Do you guys do any, have
you considered or ever run any sort of bug bounty program?
We don't have a bug bounty program right now. I mean, the hard part with a bug bounty program
is it takes money. So if you would like to see a bug bounty program happening at the
PSF, get in touch with the PSF. Send the email.
Yeah, I think incentives are really aligned there. There's a lot of companies that have
this tooling at the center of their data center. So maybe, maybe, maybe, maybe we can make
it happen.
All right. Next up, the REPL, or the PyREPL for the Python PyREPL. What's the deal with
this?
Yeah, so this was a, a talk that was given by a couple of different core devs. I think
this included a bunch of people, Pablo, Lukasz, and Lissandros all gave this talk. And it
was about, hey, this new REPL that's coming in Python 3.13. Here's all the cool stuff
that it can do and how it makes the usability so much better for people. And they demoed
a whole bunch of the new features, which was really exciting. There was lots of applause
showing off a few of these like little, little features. And I think that the other
side of it is like, because this new REPL is written in Python and not written in C,
it lowers the barrier for contributions and maintenance drastically. Before the REPL was
like super entwined with like the parser and all of these other really low level details
of Python that a lot of people probably didn't want to get involved with if they didn't have
to versus this where it's this completely separate and much more easy to contribute
to piece of software.
Yeah. And did this come from the PyPy, P-Y-P-Y project?
Yes, this was P-Y-P-Y. And I think that there's been some, some back and forth contributing
back, contributing forward, all of that, which is also really great, right? Having
one REPL shared between two different implementations.
Yeah, that's great. Just working, working better together, more people working on it.
I always call it P-Y-P-Y because some people call Python packaging injects, PyPy, but that's
also this other thing. So anyway.
It's a non-zero part of every one of my days, right?
I'm sure that is.
Because a lot of the times, you know, a significant percentage of my work as a security person
is being in working groups that are not Python related at all. And yeah, there's a lot of
PyPy flying around.
Yeah. You talk about NumPy being on PyPy and you're like, okay, hold on.
Hold on. Could be two different things.
There's a lot going on here.
Yeah.
So this is really interesting. I haven't really played with it much. I honestly don't spend
a ton of time in the bare Python REPL. Like if I'm, I'm REPLing, a lot of times I'm in
the JetBrains sort of enhanced REPL that's inside PyCharm, something like that.
But and I think partly because there was a lot of challenges with the bare Python REPL,
right?
There's no autocomplete, but worse than that was if you've got a five line function and
you want to edit it, you've kind of got to go to the top part hitter.
It really was hard to work with blocks of code. There's no color, things like that.
Yeah. Color's the standard for, if you don't have color in your terminal at this point,
like even 20, basically you've given up at that point. If you don't have an emoji and
you don't have color, I mean,
Emoji's color, gotta have like the rainbow prompts and maybe like the ASCII logo of the
thing when it starts up.
A starship. Oh yeah. I didn't even consider the ASCII art and possibly the ASCII art in
color.
So I do think it sounds like a minor deal, but just the readability of having highlighting
and stuff is really nice.
Yeah. Syntax highlighting is huge. Syntax highlighting is like really huge. That's not
a part of the current REPL, I don't think, but like it becomes much more possible because
this PyREPL exists.
Yeah, exactly. Very cool.
I think that like the biggest thing, yeah, like the whole blocks of code, I just remember
the demo of them showing like, oh, you have like five lines you have to hit up, up, up
like four times.
Oh, and if you mess it up, you got to start over. You get it out of order.
You're just sad. You just contemplate putting it in a file instead of doing this in the
REPL.
Exactly. That's why I'm not in there. I avoid being in there because it's hard.
This will be really, really great for people that are just starting Python Journey, because
I think that a lot of people learning and starting off will use the REPL straight up
instead of an IDE. And so like having this, there was a big focus on like teachability
and documenting it and making it work the same. Like if you actually like read the post,
like what the discussions were about for like everyone is basically totally in favor. They
loved it, but they wanted to make sure that this was going to be like a consistent experience,
specifically like Carol Willing had this big point about like having a consistent experience
being really important for teaching Python across different operating systems.
Yeah. And something a little bit, a little bit better than up, up, up five times and
don't get it out of order.
Exactly.
Yeah. That's cool. Though, I guess one of the, I don't know if this was discussed, but
one of the challenges of this, I think is it requires, and this is not necessarily bad,
but just a challenge is I think it requires the new Windows terminal rather than say cmd.exe,
the older style. So it just works out of the box on macOS and on Linux, but on windows,
you got to be a little careful about how you run it. Is that right?
So I actually don't know what the current status of all of this is because time has
marched on since these blog posts have happened. And there has been a lot of work done on the
windows side, the current team, like the team that presented this didn't have any windows
experience. And so they didn't know really how hard it was going to be. I think that
there's been a lot of strides in the windows side of things. So I think the situation is
better. I don't know offhand if cmd.exe is supported or if it's just the new windows
terminal, but I, yeah.
I think it's fine if it's a new Windows terminal, like people need to be using that thing anyway.
It's true.
It's like opening up on your Mac and just having like the bare white bash. I guess it's
Z shell these days, but just the completely, you know, non-fixed font. Like what is this
thing that you are running? I feel like the terminal is horrible. Well, that thing is,
but you could make it a lot nicer by the way. And it's similar trade off there in the
Windows world. So, okay. Interesting.
Next one is, should we adopt calendar versioning? We're beyond zero-verse, so that's really
good, but there's been a reluctance to have Python 4, but we've got 3, 12, 313. Are we
just going to have 3.128 or should we come up with something else? Right? What is calendar
versioning and should we adopt it and how many digits should it have?
Yeah. So this was presented on by Hugo, who is the new release manager for Python 3, 14
and 15, which maybe that's a little presumptive saying those numbers. Cause if this goes through,
that will not be the case anymore.
He's going to work himself straight out of a job here. What's going on?
This was, there were definitely jokes about like, this is just your attempt to get out
of being the release manager for these releases. But yeah, so Hugo proposed this, this is kind
of like a pre- PEP feeling out of how this situation should be and trying to pare down
the options I think was Hugo's biggest question. What should we do it and should we pare down
the options? Cause there's a million different ways we can do calendar versioning. And yeah,
I think if you scroll down, there was a slide that had just every single possible calendar
versioning possibility for Python and all the different languages. But yeah, calendar
versioning is like really common for programming languages and other things that are similar
to Python. And so this was basically like, Hey, we have this yearly release cycle that
is been working for a while and we're probably going to keep doing it.
It's worth pointing out for people who don't know that it used to be 18 months. And so
the calendar versioning would get a little out of phase or something there. But now,
that it's yearly in the fall, it really lines up perfectly.
Yeah. And so this kind of assumes that we're going to keep doing the yearly thing, which
I'm fine with the yearly thing, but yeah, as long as we kept the yearly schedule, it
would line, like the release year would line up with whatever the, so it would be like
the ended, the one that was like most agreed upon was like three dot and then a two digit
year or what would end up becoming a three digit year when we roll over to a hundred,
assuming that Python is still used in a hundred years. But yeah, so like that was kind of
like the one that was most palatable to core devs or people were most excited about.
And I think the big reason why switching to like a Calver year was interesting is that
we have this thing called like support lifetime. So like how long is CPython supported? How
long do you get security fixes? How long do you get bug fixes?
Right. Like let me, yeah, exactly. Like, let me put this out to the audience. Is Python
3.8 supported or is it not supported? I don't know. You got to do, you got to do math. You
got to think about it. Yeah. So 3.7 just recently dropped support, right? Which is crazy. Cause
that seems like a pretty new version of my mind, but it totally makes sense. But if you
just knew it's supported for how many years, six years, five years, it's five years for
security releases, I believe. Yeah. So then you're like, it's 2025. So, you know, 2020
out the math becomes a lot easier. And then you also say like, do I have the current one,
right? If you're not tracking it super carefully, like 3.11, is that the latest? Like, I don't
know. I don't, I only use Python every like once a month, but was it 2023? Oh, I see.
Well, maybe that's not the latest one. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. So it was just an interesting
conversation about figuring out what the best potential option was. And then Hugo ended
up creating a PEP and I think that's being discussed right now. So. Cool. Why not 2024?
Why 24? Because that feels, I don't know, it just feels like you've just point shifted
what you're doing now rather than, than really clear. Cause you know, as a new person coming
in, you don't see that and go, it's 24. So it must be 2024. And unless you really like
put together the calendar, but if it's a dot 2024, you're like, I bet that's the year,
you know? Right. Yeah. I mean, cause eventually the, in the not too distant future, there
will be a Python 3.24. Exactly. Yeah. We'll see. So there's going to be a pepper on this.
You say, in fact, it says right here, PEP 604, right? I think it's PEP. What is it like?
Well, you know, that's the, just the yearly announcement. You scroll down all the way
to the bottom. It'll find some peps. Yeah. There's a lot of drafting. It just says drafting
a PEP. Give that a click. I'm pretty sure there's a number 2026. There we go. Okay.
Yeah. Oh, so that's going to be a while till they release this PEP. Well, so I'm just kidding.
The most, the most important part of this discussion was that the Python version
3.14 be, be preserved Python. So yeah, cool. It wasn't allowed for three, 3.14 to change
it. Yeah. The only thing that I can think of that you would have the two digits is that
there's a lot of code and regular expressions and junk out there that checks for that. But
you know, if we talk about some of the other stuff out there, like that's a pretty minor
change. Like for example, free-threaded Python. Yes. Rethreaded Python. It's here. It is here.
Sort of. You know what actually really surprised me is when I saw this PEP come through, is
it 702 or something like that? It said, we're going to allow free threaded Python, which
I'm going to have you explain for folks in a moment, but you're going to have to have
a special build of it. And I thought, oh, well that means if you want to play with it,
you're going to have to build your own. But I noticed that the installers now give you
an option for it. Yeah, they do. Yeah. The installers pair side-by-side install. Right.
Yeah. The, what is it? I think there's like a T that gets put onto your actual like. Yes.
Python T is what you type instead of Python. Yeah. If you want the free threaded one. Yeah.
I mean, free threading is here. I mean, there's options if you're compiling it yourself, you
just enable some options. And I think I go over that in the actual blog post to the options
that you actually use to try it out. And yeah, it free threading essentially is, it's a way
to remove the GIL and move to a different like reference counting model, object counting
model. And which is quite exciting for a lot of people, but it will, what it will end up
meaning is that a lot of the packages that are written in C or that are relying on C
Python APIs will have to get either, you know, tweaked a little bit to like use these slightly
different C APIs to make it so that they play nicely with having no GIL enabled and with
the new memory management. Yeah. It's super exciting. Changes from the ecosystem basically.
Yeah. Just because you have threads doesn't mean you get perfect scalability across the
cores. I can't remember who wrote this article. I said, Simon Willison, maybe who did some,
yeah, I'm pretty sure it was Simon Willison who wrote one that said, look, we're going
to take an algorithm that can, is kind of embarrassingly parallel and parallelize it.
And it turned out to be something like 50% gain per core. So it was like he had eight
cores and it was four times faster with free threaded Python than without, which is still
if you can get your code to run four times faster, that's still really good. Right? Yeah.
But it's, it's going to have, like you said, I think it's going to have an interesting
requirement put on all the people building packages. Right. And I know when I hear people
say, I think maybe you just said like, Oh, it's going to be the C extension packages
that are really going to have to deal with it. Cause they, they all have to do locks
in their thing. I think even in the Python code, there's certainly algorithms that have
multiple steps that they'll get some data here. They'll work with the data. They'll
make some changes, then they'll put the data back in the same place. And even that
would be subject to a race condition. Right. And I think we're, you know, I've in long
in the past did a lot of C++ I did a lot of C# and in communities like that,
people are like always focused. They're like, always kind of crazy about two things, memory
and threading. And we just don't do that in Python. We just, I think we have just levered
the fact that the GIL gives us kind of enough coarse grain granularity, the execution of
our code that it's just not something we hit a lot. And we don't try to do a ton of threading
because it doesn't work all that well. However, this, this could expose lots of stuff. This
could put a new focus on that. Yeah, definitely. Yeah. Just having more people using threading
with Python, that that's going to be huge for finding thread safety issues. Yeah, it's,
it's just really exciting. I think that and there's another blog post, a completely separate
one that talks about like the C API. And there was some mention about like free threading
and evolving the API so that it's a lot easier to use from a three, a free threading perspective.
So like, there's a ton of work happening in here to make this as easy, hopefully brief
kind of split in the ecosystem and then have it converge together. I think that's like
the overall plan is like, okay, we gotta, we gotta have a way that if this is really
not working out, we can go back. But if it is working, we need a way that we can actually
land this thing as the default.
Right, right, right. And the PEP discusses this is like, we're gonna, we're gonna see
how it goes, which is really interesting. But I think it's not breaking in the sense
that you can't still run Python three with the thing that you've got, you just might
not be able to enable this free threading aspect of it for some time. Whereas from two
to three, it's like you cannot run this library on three, period. There's no scenario which
this is going to work because it needs to take into account this and it doesn't and
so it's out. So I feel like there's more time and space to evolve it. And you could say,
well, in this space, you know, this data science section of the world, we use these seven libraries
and we're going to work and make them compatible so that we can get way better performance
or you know, we're going to work to make sure that FastAPI and Pydantic support it really
well so that we can scale our web servers better. Whatever.
Yeah, no, this will be huge for for like web and, and data. I think that a lot of people
are excited for this for a really good. Yeah, I totally agree. I totally agree. Okay, so
this is a big deal. It's coming in 3.13. But you've got to run Python T for now. Yeah,
it's 3.13. But it's also available in the pre releases. The first release candidate
for 3.13 is out. So give it a test. If you haven't given it a test, give it a test. Yeah,
very cool. All right, what's what one do we want to talk about next? We got just a couple
more minutes to cover. We've got what about Python and mobile? I think that one's I know
there's the black swan talk that Keith Russell McGee gave. And Carol willing also
sort of shouted out like, there's a couple of places that are really, really important
computationally in the world that Python kind of isn't. We should have it there. And number
one has got to be mobile. Yeah, mobile and front end for me mobile and front end are
the two. And like a far distant behind that is like, could I get a single binary out of
my app that I can give to someone that's a different that also is in there, but it's
it's like, not as important as, hey, I want to I want to build some mobile apps. Can I
use Python? You know, I want to learn that with an easy language. I use Python. And ask
me something else. Yeah, yeah, right. Like next question. Yeah, so this was, this was
a, it's almost almost like a big status update on where Python is in the mobile space, which
is really exciting, because they've made a ton of progress on getting like actual tiering
of support for these platforms. So if you don't know, Python has a like platform support
tiers where it's like tier one is like x86 Linux, right? Like, that's a, you know, 90%
of PyPI downloads are that like, yeah, well, we want to support that one. And then as things
like macOS, you know, x86 and arm and all of that, right. And then lower down, there's
tier two, which is, you know, the platforms that they have people that are interested
in them. But if those people were to go away, then we wouldn't actually have a way to support
them. And tier three is like even more so, right. So having tier three support for Python
for both Android and iOS for 313. Like, that's super exciting. It means that these things
are getting actively tested. There's like integration testing on real platforms, and
that there's people that care about it that are fixing bugs. And this is exactly what
you need to get your platform supported. And so this is all being provided by Anaconda
funding this project and beware. Okay. Yeah, that's right. They are, you know, beware.
And Keith has been on this for a long time, but Anaconda have come along and put more
time and energy behind it, in terms of funding. And I think people as well, I'm not sure,
but certainly in funding, that's awesome.
Yeah, so I think this was, it was both a status report and also kind of trying to figure out
how these sorts of platforms can get tested more easily and like actually not having constant
breaking because these platforms are so different from, you know, what almost every other core
developer is using to develop Python or a lot more limited in terms of capabilities,
and like lockdown in a security perspective too.
And they have no regard for backwards compatibility. It's so frustrating. I got, I, you know,
I have mobile apps for the talk Python courses that are in both iOS and Android app stores.
And I'll get messages like, Hey, dear developer, if we see that you're built against three-year-old
APIs, if you don't rebuild and republish your app in the next six months, we're taking it out.
The last one I did this for was Google. I'm like three, three years. Okay. Can we,
no, we can't get any better compatibility than that. Like, I just got to keep re-uploading the
same thing, even if there's no changes. Like, so, you know, that's just a different mentality of
like, ah, we changed all that. We don't like that anymore.
Yeah. Luckily I'm, I'm actually not sure how affected Python in particular is by things like
that. Cause that's like utilizing APIs, like mobile SDK APIs versus like the operating system
of the phone, which.
Yeah. Right. Like people would build apps with Python and then they would be subjected to these
emails. And it's not even that I was necessarily using any of those APIs. It's just like, we see
you're compiled against the wrong version. So try again, you know?
Yeah, no, the, yeah, the difficulties that I've, at least from, from this talk have figured
out is that like these platforms are just a lot more locked down. So like a lot of system calls
won't be available that the test suite like assumes are available always.
Sure. It's almost like a circuit Python sort of deal, but not that extreme.
Yeah. It's like somewhere in the middle and figuring out how to all work together happily
and develop on this similar code base that has all these different target platforms.
Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. Awesome. Well, I am, I'm really excited. I'm all here for it. If
three years ago, I think it was when we started working on those mobile apps, if I could have
used Python in a really solid way, a hundred percent, those apps to be built in Python, but
just, there's so many, so much tooling and stuff around. Now you got to create a signed APK before
you upload. There's a lot of stuff going on there. And so hopefully they, they get that. That would
be, would be a game changer and just, you know, it's not on, it wasn't here. Almost surprised me
that it wasn't here, but front end stuff, WebAssembly, PyScripts, Pyodide, all those
things I think are in that same realm. Although they can just kind of ship stuff to the web
because there's no gatekeepers, but still. Yeah. Was that mentioned anywhere during the
summit that just didn't make a post? No, Wasm was not, there was no topic about Wasm specifically
at this language summit at least. Yeah, sure. I think there was the previous year.
Previous year there was. Yeah. Should we make PDB better? Does it matter?
Are people using PDB? What do you think? Yeah. So this, this was all about, PDB is Python's
debugger for people that don't know. If you've never used it, it lets you kind of like drop into,
set a break point in Python and then drop into that exact spot with all the context and everything,
which is really- At a lower level. Yeah. At a lower level than VS Code or PyCharm.
Right. Exactly. Yeah. Like seeing all these like super internals of Python, if that's something
that you really need. Right. And so this was a talk that was mostly about, okay, we have PDB,
but now we have all of these new models like free threading and all of that. And also we're being
a little bit held back by backwards compatibility. There's like a specific, really specific point
where because of backwards compatibility reasons and PDB is a part of the Python standard library,
it becomes difficult to break backwards compatibility, even if it would mean you get a
bunch of really good stuff out of it. You can't always do that because people are depending on it.
And I think that the, yeah, the recommendation was maybe we should develop this outside of the
standard library so we can break backwards compatibility if it's not necessary and make
it so that we can support multiple versions instead of just having it be per version. And
yeah. Yeah. That's a good idea. That's exactly what I was thinking. Cause there's the whole
dead batteries talk. Like, does this still belong here? I'm not necessarily thinking this should not
be in Python, but yeah. Something broken out maybe, but take that exact code, break it out,
but enhance it kind of independently. Yeah. I think the concern from some people in the room
was that, oh, if we break this out onto PyPI, then it would potentially mean that it would not get
the same level of contribution that PDB sees because it's part of Python. Right. Sure. And
I mean, totally valid in my opinion too. Like being a part of Python is a huge,
like blessing of like, yeah, this is something important. Right. But I think that there's,
there's other ways to signal that that's something important. Like if you look at like my pie,
my pie is underneath the Python GitHub organization. And so maybe something like that,
right. Where it's this tool that is very actively used by core developers for development.
And it is a little bit more official than, you know, just some random person putting something
up on PyPI. This is core developers supporting this. And black is that way too, I believe, right?
It is. So maybe something to signal just a little bit more of an official, this is a core developer
tool. Here's why you should contribute to it instead of just, you know, a random project
on PyPI, which definitely wouldn't be in that case. It would not, it would definitely not.
All right. How about, how about a quick review of maybe some, some of the lightning talks?
Any of these stand out? You know, Rust and Python is seriously one.
Yeah. Emily's talk was, yeah, I was gonna say Emily's got a good one.
Emily has a really good one because, and this is like, it's, it's almost meta, right? Because
lightning talks are not submitted ahead of time. You actually have to submit them during other
people's talks, like to the list that you want to talk about this and then put together some
slides really quickly. So yeah, these talks are pretty impressive in that way, having mere minutes.
But the Emily's talk was about, it was kind of like wrapping up a theme that was being heard
multiple times over the course of the language summit. But obviously this is a problem outside
of the language summit too, which is that when someone goes to make a prototype for a PEP,
they are given, at least today, not a whole lot of support for doing that prototype because
it's basically like, oh, we think that this should be developed outside of the standard library
initially. Right. Like that's a really common determination that the steering council comes to.
And so being able to have kind of like a, a standardized way that people do a PEP prototype
outside of the standard library. So things like creating a repo and like having all of this
existing infrastructure set up and maybe even hosting it under the Python GitHub organization
to give it some like air of officiality of like, yeah, this is something like really big is
happening here. It's not just like someone in a corner writing something, right. Like giving some
more grandiosity to, to the work that's being done and not just kind of saying, oh, go away.
Like that is the intention, right. But that's kind of how it can land sometimes.
Right. And maybe setting up people for success, at least this is what we're going to expect from
you. If you go through this process, then you've got, you're further down the pipeline of
having that conversation for a PEP.
Yeah, definitely. And like, if you're wanting to write something that is for Python, you know,
you probably don't necessarily care about like setting up these exact workflows for publishing
to PyPI. Like that's just a whole bunch of things that are in your way to actually being successful.
So having that all be figured out already ahead of time for you
makes things a lot easier for you. So,
yeah. Yep. Yep.
Let's, let's finish out with Yuri Silvanov's presentation,
efficient data sharing between sub-interpreters. And it's interesting because
we talked about free threaded Python, but the year before the big news
was sub-interpreters and Eric Snow's work. And those are not directly competing type of things,
but in a sense they're kind of competing.
Yeah, they're definitely competing for being like the model of how to do efficient,
you know, parallelism in Python.
Yeah. How do we isolate this stuff so that we can avoid the guilt? We take it out and add
different algorithms or do we just make copies of the interpreter and run them in isolation,
but then you have this data sharing issue. I can't just share a pointer easily. Right. So
what's this about?
Yeah. So Yuri basically came with, and this was also, if you want the extended version,
Yuri also gave like an actual PyCon talk about this library that he's developed called Memhive.
And what's it called?
Memhive. Like M-E-M-H-I-V-E.
Yeah. All right. Awesome. And just for everyone listening just this week, last week, recently,
all the videos of all the talks are now available on YouTube. So it's been a while coming, but you
can go watch it now.
Exactly. So go watch them all. If you missed out on a talk, go watch them. But yeah, this,
so this library in particular is, it's basically a way using immutable data structures. There's this
immutable data structure called an H-A-M-T. I actually don't know what it's short for, but
it's a hash array map tree. There we go. It was in the, I wrote it down.
And it's essentially like a way to have this tree that can be passed around and shared without
worrying what the other processes, sub-interpreters are. They're not processes.
The other sub-interpreters are doing to this data structure. So it enables a more efficient and safe
way of sharing data. That's kind of like in a tree structure. And I think one, the demo that
he ended up giving was about a dictionary-like data structure where, you know, you have a million
keys and a bunch of sub-interpreter workers working on that data. And they're able to,
because it is using this immutable data structure, the modifications and changes are all safe,
but it's also like super scalable and performant.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The thing about parallelism and multi-threading is if it's immutable,
you can have many things that you want reading from the same memory. It's only when they start
writing does it matter. So.
Exactly. Yeah. This has a way, a mechanism to capture the writes in a way that is safe. So that
like the current one can see what has been written and then the other ones aren't affected because
their copy is not changed.
Okay. That sounds very interesting. We talked about the coming compatibility matrix of free
threaded Python. This won't have that issue, right? This operates in the every version of Python.
Yeah. So this, I would assume that this sort of module would be able to say like,
I am ready for a GIL free world. So that's like the mechanism that I believe CPython has adopted
for saying that your C module is ready for not having a GIL. You actually have to opt into it.
And then that module will be allowed to run in a free threaded Python.
Yeah. It's something I recently learned is there's separate wheeled builds for free
threaded Python as well. So that's interesting.
Yeah. It's its own, I don't know exactly the phrase for it, but yeah, its own wheel tag.
Platform target or whatever.
Platform. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Like free threaded gets appended to, you know, macOS arm 64 or whatever.
Exactly.
Yeah. Awesome. All right. Seth, this has been great. How about some parting thoughts? Let's
close this out with just takeaways from the whole experience.
Yeah. I mean, the language summit is lovely. One of the things that's like most important to me is
like this whole aspect of storytelling. And so that's why I felt really, really happy that I
was invited along to be able to tell these stories to all of you. And I think that having all of
these different narratives all in one place of all of these huge themes about what Python is
going through all at once. Right. Like it's really incredible how many different things are
happening in Python all at once. And like sometimes when you're focusing on just one or just two,
you can, you know, you don't have this huge context of, wow, Python is changing in like
at least 20 different ways all at once. And we're somehow doing really, really well, I would say.
Like, yeah, I have no doubt about any of, any of these huge changes that Python is going through,
like to, to take it in the wrong direction. Like I'm feeling hopeful and excited about all of them.
So it's an exciting time. Yeah, I am as well. And it is really tricky to get a picture,
a holistic picture of the progress because there's a lot of different groups doing
different things and there's no one person's or one company's job to get somebody to come and tell
that story. So, yeah, thanks for giving us the insight here. It's been awesome. Yeah. Thanks
for being on the show and I'm sure we'll have you back soon. Yeah. Sounds good. Thanks for having me.
See ya. Bye.